Blog post first draft about the Pathogen detection Training Material (#1865)
galaxyproject/galaxy-hub: content/news/2023-01-25-foodborne-training/index.md

---
title: 'Pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy - Foodborne Edition: Training material and workshops!"'
tease: "Our new GTN material has been published last month along with multiple up coming workshops"
authors: Engy Nasr, Bérénice Batut
date: "2023-02-01"
hide_tease: false
tags: [training]
subsites: [global]
---

> Food contamination with pathogens are a major burden on our society. Globally, they affect an estimated 600 million people a year and impact socioeconomic development at different levels. These outbreaks are mainly due to Salmonella spp. followed by Campylobacter spp. and Noroviruses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Food contamination with pathogens are a major burden on our society. Globally, they affect an estimated 600 million people a year and impact socioeconomic development at different levels. These outbreaks are mainly due to *Salmonella* spp. followed by *Campylobacter* spp. and Noroviruses.
```

---
title: 'Pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy - Foodborne Edition: Training material and workshops!"'
tease: "Our new GTN material has been published last month along with multiple up coming workshops"
authors: Engy Nasr, Bérénice Batut
date: "2023-03-20"
hide_tease: false
tags: [training]
subsites: [global]
---

> # The story behind the training
> 
> ## General Introduction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

More than **90 people registered**, 53% male, with diverse career stages and locations:

<img class="img-fluid float-right" src="/news/2023-01-25-foodborne-training/2023-01-25-workshop-participants-countries.png" style="width:300px;" alt="Participants Countries Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut"/>

<img class="img-fluid float-right" src="news/2023-01-25-foodborne-training/2023-01-25-workshop-participants-study-area.png" style="width:300px;" alt="Participants Background Knowledge Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut"/>

**63 confirmed** their registration and gave us more information about their motivation in participating in the workshop.

![Participants Background Knowledge Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut](./2023-01-25-workshop-participants-motivation.png)

To help prepare for the course, we also questioned them about their background in the generation of pathogen sequencing data, using Galaxy, but also about their confidence about the topics, here are their answers:

> ![Participants Background Knowledge Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut](./2023-01-25-workshop-participants-motivation2.png)

Reviewer: I would be nice to have at least 2 images per row there

![Participants Feedback Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut](./2023-01-25-workshop-feedback1.png)

![Participants Feedback Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut](./2023-01-25-workshop-feedback6.png)

In detail, they liked the well-documented and detailed training materials with the hands-on part and data interpretation in addition to Slack for interactions and prompt answers. The instructions are very clear on what to do. The instructors are also knowledgeable about the materials of the workshop. 
One mentioned loving the fact that this workshop is accessible for those who live in Indonesia to learn more about analysis and tools of Nanopore sequencing

They raised some concerns about the structure of the workshop with maybe a longer workshop or organized a bit differently to be able to do all the steps and explain them in more details. Indeed,  the second part was pretty unclear to follow and interpret results. One also suggested having an overview of all the important tools. We will process all comments to improve our training and delivery for next time.

Anyway, they mostly agree that they can immediately apply what they learned and they would recommend the workshop 

> ![Participants Feedback Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut](./2023-01-25-workshop-feedback7.png)

Reviewer: Same comment as above here

---

> title: 'New GTN Material and Workshops under the topic: "Pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy - Foodborne Edition"'

Reviewer: We need probably something more catchy

tease: "Our new GTN material has been published last month along with multiple up coming workshops"
authors: Engy Nasr, Bérénice Batut
date: "2023-02-01"
hide_tease: false
tags: [training]
subsites: [global]
---

Food contamination with pathogens are a major burden on our society. Globally, they affect an estimated 600 million people a year and impact socioeconomic development at different levels. These outbreaks are mainly due to Salmonella spp. followed by Campylobacter spp. and Noroviruses.

The evolution of techniques in the last decades has made possible the development of methods to quickly identify responsible pathogen using their **DNA and without prior isolation**. Long-read sequencing tehcniques like ONT make these methods even **easier and more practical to identify strains quicker and with fewer reads**.

> 

Reviewer: And change the flow: 
1. General introduction
2. Introduction of the project
3. Section about the tutorial
4. Section about the 1st workshop
5. Next steps, including workshops

In this tutorial, using direct Nanopore sequencing data, we show how to

1. **agnostically detect pathogens** (what exactly is this pathogen and what is the degree of its severity (its virulence factors) from data extracted directly (without prior cultivation) from a potentially contaminated sample (e.g. food like chicken, cow, etc.,) and sequenced using Nanopore
2. **compare different samples to track** the possible source of contamination

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflows are supported by a dedicated tutorial.
```

> Our new GTN material has been published last month along with multiple up coming workshops: ["Pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy - Foodborne Edition"](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/metagenomics/tutorials/pathogen-detection-from-nanopore-foodborne-data/tutorial.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## A tutorial for pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy

Our tutorial material is available since last month on the Galaxy Training Network: ["Pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy - Foodborne Edition"](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/metagenomics/tutorials/pathogen-detection-from-nanopore-foodborne-data/tutorial.html)
```

> ## The story behind the training
> A workflow has been developed under the [__EOSC-Life industry call__](https://www.eosc-life.eu/industrycall/) project for creating an **Accessible** and **scalable** workflow for foodborne pathogens detection, identification and tracking for Nanopore sequenced data. Using Galaxy plaform we were able to create a **FAIR** workflow to agnostically detect pathogens anywhere not only in food. A training material in the Metagenomics category in the [__GTN__](https://training.galaxyproject.org/) has been created to guide learners and users to use and adapt the workflow. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

title: 'Pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy - Foodborne Edition: Training material and workshops!"'
tease: "Our new GTN material has been published last month along with multiple up coming workshops"
authors: Engy Nasr, Bérénice Batut
date: "2023-03-20"
hide_tease: false
tags: [training]
subsites: [global]
---
# The story behind the training

> ## General Introduction

Reviewer: You do not need that I think

The evolution of techniques in the last decades has made possible the development of methods to quickly identify responsible pathogen using their **DNA and without prior isolation**. Long-read sequencing techniques like ONT make these methods even **easier and more practical to identify strains quicker and with fewer reads**.

## Intoduction of the project behind the training material
With the support of [__EOSC-Life industry call__](https://www.eosc-life.eu/industrycall/) funding, the Freiburg Galaxy team and Biolytix developed a series of Galaxy **FAIR** workflows to make foodborne pathogens detection, identification and tracking from Nanopore sequenced data **accessible** and **scalable**.

Even better, the implemented workflow series can:
1. **agnostically detect pathogens** (what exactly is this pathogen and what is the degree of its severity (its virulence factors) from data extracted directly (without prior cultivation) from a potentially contaminated sample (e.g. food like chicken, cow, etc.,) and sequenced using Nanopore
2. **compare different samples to track** the possible source of contamination
The workflows are supported by a dedicated tutorial.

> ## A tutorial for pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## A tutorial for pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy

```

Our tutorial material is available since last month on the Galaxy Training Network: ["Pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy - Foodborne Edition"](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/metagenomics/tutorials/pathogen-detection-from-nanopore-foodborne-data/tutorial.html)

The training includes two versions:

- A **Short Version**: where learners will run 5 prebuilt workflows, such that at the end they have the full workflow running.
- A **Long Version**: Where a step by step, tool by tool, is presented along with its parameters for the learners to run

The workflow or the step by step tools used in the training can be summaried as follows: 

![Pathogen Detection Workflow](./2023-01-25-foodBorne-workflow.png)

# Workshops
Several workshops using this tutorial have been run or will be run in the next months.

> ## A practical workshop for (foodborne) pathogen detection frohttp://192.168.0.220:8080/news/2023-01-25-foodborne-training/m (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy

Reviewer: Something wrong here

## Workshops

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several workshops using this tutorial have been run or will be run in the next months.

### A practical workshop for (foodborne) pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy
```

> The [__first workshop__](https://galaxyproject.org/events/2023-02-02-foodborne-pathogen-detection-workshop/) conducted on the training was on the 2nd of Feburary 2023. **35** on-site and online participants from different background knowledge have attended the workshop. The workshop started with an introduction about Galaxy and the GTN, an introduction to the EOSC-Life industry call Foodborne pathogen detection project and finally our new GTN material was explained.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [__first workshop__](/events/2023-02-02-foodborne-pathogen-detection-workshop/) to test this training was conducted on the 2nd of February 2023 as a 1-day hybrid (F2F at FHNW Muttenz, Switzerland and online), free and practical workshop.

**35** on-site and online participants from different background knowledge have attended the workshop. The workshop started with an introduction to Galaxy and the GTN, an introduction to the Foodborne pathogen detection project funded by EOSC-Life, and finally our new GTN material was explained.
```

> ## Workshop Details
> We organized a practical workshop for (foodborne) pathogen detection from (direct Nanopore) sequencing data using Galaxy on February 2nd as a 1-day hybrid (F2F at FHNW Muttenz, Switzerland and online), free and practical workshop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

More than **90 people registered**, 53% male, with diverse career stages and locations:

> ![Participants Countries Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut](/news/2023-01-25-foodborne-training/2023-01-25-workshop-participants-countries.png)
> 
> ![Participants Background Knowledge Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut](/news/2023-01-25-foodborne-training/2023-01-25-workshop-participants-study-area.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img class="img-fluid float-right" src="/news/2023-01-25-foodborne-training/2023-01-25-workshop-participants-countries.png" style="width:300px;" alt="Participants Countries Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut"/>

<img class="img-fluid float-right" src="news/2023-01-25-foodborne-training/2023-01-25-workshop-participants-study-area.png" style="width:300px;" alt="Participants Background Knowledge Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut"/>
```

Reviewer: Not sure it renders well. The idea is to have the images side by side. You will need to check locally how it looks like

One mentioned loving the fact that this workshop is accessible for those who live in Indonesia to learn more about analysis and tools of Nanopore sequencing

They raised some concerns about the structure of the workshop with maybe a longer workshop or organized a bit differently to be able to do all the steps and explain them in more details. Indeed,  the second part was pretty unclear to follow and interpret results. One also suggested having an overview of all the important tools. We will process all comments to improve our training and delivery for next time.

Anyway, they mostly agree that they can immediately apply what they learned and they would recommend the workshop 

![Participants Feedback Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut](/news/2023-01-25-foodborne-training/2023-01-25-workshop-feedback7.png)

![Participants Feedback Graphs - Created by Bérénice Batut](/news/2023-01-25-foodborne-training/2023-01-25-workshop-feedback2.png)

> ## Other Workshops

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Follow-up workshops
```

> - On Friday the 24th of Feburary, the training was also part of the [__High-Throughput Data Analysis workshop with Galaxy (HTS)__](https://galaxyproject.org/events/2023-02-20-freiburg-workshop/) running from the 20th till the 24th of Feburary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Friday the 24th of Feburary, the training was also part of the [__High-Throughput Data Analysis workshop with Galaxy (HTS)__](/events/2023-02-20-freiburg-workshop/) running from the 20th till the 24th of Feburary.
```

> - Nevertheless, the traing will be recorded and presented at the [__GTN 2023 Smörgåsbord__](https://gallantries.github.io/video-library/events/smorgasbord3/) in May.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, this tutorial will be recorded to be part of the [__GTN 2023 Smörgåsbord__](https://gallantries.github.io/video-library/events/smorgasbord3/) in May.
```
